--- 
category:  Writing
date: 2008/05/14 22:03:07
tags: 
- fiction
title: Fantasy and Science Fiction July 2008
comments: true
published: true
layout: post
---

<h2></h2>  <p>Last week John Joseph Adams posted a <a href="http://www.sfsite.com/fsf/blog/2008/05/07/get-a-free-copy-of-the-july-2008-issue-of-fsf/">promotional giveaway</a> for the July 2008 issue of <em><a href="http://www.sfsite.com/fsf/index.html">The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction</a></em>.&#160; Adams offered a deal:&#160; You get the free issue if you promise to blog about it.</p>  <p>For the past 25 years I've read very little short fiction.&#160; Lately I've been writing some short fiction myself, and have become interested in learning what makes excellent short stories excellent.&#160; I began picking up the odd copy of F&amp;SF and other speculative fiction magazines to study as well as to enjoy.&#160; This promotion seemed right up my alley.</p>  <p>I ordered my copy on Thursday, received it on Saturday, and read the final story tonight.</p>  <p>Here are the stories and my reactions (no spoilers here).</p>  <p><strong>&quot;Reader's Guide&quot; by Lisa Goldstein.</strong>&#160; I was surprisingly touched by this lovely story about one of the more mysterious aspects of the art of writing fiction.&#160; I can't say anything about the plot without giving away the beauty of the story, but the story is written in the form of a reader's guide.</p>  <p><strong>&quot;Fullbrim's Finding&quot; by Matthew Hughes.</strong>&#160; A &quot;discriminator&quot; goes in search of a client's lost husband, who has himself gone in search of the meaning of life.&#160; (From this story alone, I get the sense that a discriminator is something like a galactic private investigator.&#160; F&amp;SF's intro to the story suggests that the main character has appeared in other short stories and novels, and I suspect that &quot;discriminator&quot; is clarified in those).</p>  <p><strong>&quot;The Roberts&quot; by Michael Blumlein.</strong>&#160; Technology helps a man solve the problem of finding a &quot;perfect&quot; mate.&#160; But what if the imperfections are not in the mate?</p>  <p><strong>&quot;Enfant Terrible&quot; by Scot Dalrymple.</strong>&#160; A story of a man doing a job that is both necessary for the protection of society, and dirty enough that it's best kept quiet.&#160; Dalrymple tells this story second-person point of view--i.e. the main character is &quot;you&quot;.</p>  <p><strong>&quot;Poison Victory&quot; by Albert E. Chowdrey.</strong>&#160; In late 1949, a German chemist struggles to atone for his role in bring Germany to victory in WWII.</p>  <p><strong>&quot;The Dinosaur Train&quot; by James L. Cambias.</strong>&#160; A setback in a family business--a sort of circus with live dinosaurs--brings three generations of unresolved conflicts to the moment of truth.</p>  <p>My strongest reactions were to the two more experimental stories.&#160; I liked &quot;Enfant Terrible&quot; least, specifically because of the second-person point of view.&#160; Second-person always makes me fear that the perspective was chosen more for the author's amusement than for its ability to illuminate the story.&#160; In this case I stumbled over the POV, and it didn't offer any compensations that I could see.&#160; I liked the story, but I liked it less for the POV.</p>  <p>The story I liked most was &quot;Reader's Guide.&quot;&#160; I enjoyed my initial puzzle of &quot;how the heck do you tell a story in the form of a reader's guide?&quot;&#160; As it turns out, there's something about the experimental form that seems necessary to the story.&#160; The story itself arises partly from the form, and without that form would not be as effective.&#160; That's an experiment that works.</p>  <p>When I pick up an issue of a fiction magazine I expect to enjoy one or two of the stories.&#160; I enjoyed all six of these stories.</p>
